COMPTES RENDUS / BESPRECHUNGEN

385

Lingua intellettuali egemonia in Gramsci. By Franco Lo Piparo. With a Preface by Tullio De Mauro. (= Biblioteca di Cultura Moderna, 819.) Bari: Giulio Laterza, 1979. Pp. XVIII, 292.

Reviewed by PAOLO RAMAI, Università di Pavia

I have maintained elsewhere (Ramat 1978) that a linguistic theory inspired by the principles of Marxism does not exist and never has, in spite of claims to the contrary by various 'official' representatives of Marxism. Language, being a social phenomenon, was considered by Marx in as much as it could be intimately related to other social facts which are the expression of a historically determined society. In spite of the many profound observations about language scattered throughout Marx's many writings it cannot be said that he ever came close to elaborating a theory of language in the same sense as he could be said to have developed a consistent theory of history or of economics. The same holds true for Engels too, though he devoted greater attention to linguistic phenomenology and in fact carried out empirical research on linguistic problems (cf. Ramat 1975, for an appraisal).

Antonio Gramsci (b. at Ghilarza, Nuoro, in 1891, d. in Rome in 1936) may have been the Marxist who paid the greatest attention to linguistics and incorporated language most organically in a broader theory of human society. A keen interest in linguistic questions could be traced back to studies at the University of Turin unäer the direction of Matteo Bàrtoli (1873-1946) during the years 1911-15. The author of the book under review is right in asserting the existence of an mtimate link between Gr.'s linguistic experience and his later political and philosophical views.

It could at first appear exaggerated to trace some basic concepts like 'hege・ mony5 or 'idealism' back to the reflections on language in the years 1911-15; and Lo Piparo himself is conscious of the risk of overemphasizing this aspect over the many other cultural experiences of the communist leader (p.ll). On the other hand, it is Gr. himself who, so to speak, legitimates this tenet when he underlines the fundamental unity of all the social and historical manifestations of human activity as follows:

Persuaso che tutto ciò che è attività storica dell'uomo sia una unità, che il pensiero sia una unità, vedo nella risoluzione di uno qualsiasi dei problemi di cultura la risoluzione potenziale di tutti gli altri, e credo utile abituare le intelligenze a cogliere questa unità nel molteplice aspetto della vita [....] ad applicare i principi fondamentali di una dottrina a tutte le contingenze (Gramsci 1918:174-75).

The linguistic theory which inspired Gr. was indeed that most suitable to develop these cultural interests. Neolinguistics, especially Bartoli's kind of

Historiographia Linguistica 6:3 (1979), 385-390. DOI 10.1075/hl.6.3.13ram

ISSN 0302-5160 / E-ISSN 1569-9781 © John Benjamins Publishing Company neolinguistics, was — as it is well known — a reaction against the mechanical consideration of language as shown by late, mostly Italian, Neogrammarians (Salvioni, Merlo, Goidànich) who “professed adherence to theNeo-Grammarians5 principles [. ..] in an unimaginative and doctrinaire fashion,, (Hall 1974:242). Along with the idealistic consideration of language that Neolinguists derived more or less directly from Croce, we find in Battoli considerable attention being devoted to the historic and social dimensions of language: "Per me la linguistica è sopra tutto storia, ed è molto affine alla storia del costume,, (Bartoli 1925:66). And:

I neogrammatici [.. .] sono linguisti in abstracto, cioè 'sans adhérance au sol et sans respect du temps5 [. . .] Invece i neolinguisti cercano di porre tutti quanti i fatti linguistici 'dans leur vrai cadre: celui du temps et de l'espace'. Cosicché ciò che i neolinguisti hanno aggiunto al metodo dei neogrammatici è un maggior rispetto delle esigenze del tempo e dello spazio nella storia dei linguaggi,, (Bartoli, 99; cf. LoP.,88).

In his lessons in Turin Bartoli often referred not only to Ascoli but also to Gillieron, Dauzat and especially to Meillet (see Lo P., 101). It appears therefore legitimate to associate Bartoli's linguistic position more closely with the sociological than with the idealistic approach (Lo P., 89).

Franco Lo Piparo, a young scholar teaching general linguistics at the University of Palermo, shows with philological accuracy based on direct and extended quotes from Gr. (and from Ascoli, Manzoni, Meillet, Bartoli and many others as well) the basic impact of Gr.'s linguistic training on his political and sociological views. Of course, it would be completely untenable to say that Gr?s Marxism developed from Bartoli's neolinguistics, but I think that Lo P. is right when he maintains that the originality of Gr?s Marxism does not derive from Marx or Lenin (p.3).1 This is true especially with regard to Gr.'s conception of language: here, as I said above, Marxism is but a general frame of reference for socially oriented linguistics, and direct influences must be sought elsewhere.

We must refer at this point to the lengthy Italian tradition of embedding the 'language question9 (the 4quistione della lingua5) in the broader question of the society as a whole in its historical development. One has but to think of Dante, Machiavelli, Vico, Leopardi, to mention but a few. Gr. is heir to this tradition, with the additional advantage of a definite linguistic training and a political awareness certainly not shared by all his predecessors:

Ogni volta che affiora, in un modo o nell* altro, la quistione della lingua, significa che si sta imponendo una serie di altri problemi: la formazione e Fallargamento della classe dirigente, la necessità di stabilire rapporti più intimi e sicuri tra i gruppi dirigenti e la massa popolare-nazionale, cioè di riorganizzare Fegemonia culturale (Gramsci 1975:2346).

As Lo P. rightly points out (p.155), four major topics are involved in the previous quotation from the Quaderni dal carcere'. 1) a theoretical and methodological study of comparative linguistics to explain linguistic change as a consequence of the influence of a center or class of prestige ; 2) the role of the intellectuals ('gli intellettuali9) in the diffusion of that prestige; 3) the definition of the State, and finally 4) the 4quistione della lingua'.

j The central place occupied by language is evident; it must be noted that a large part of the Quaderni written by Gr. during the prison years under Fascism and published only after the World War II is dedicated to the discussion of linguistic problems. Quaderno 29 — the last one (1935) — is entirely dedicated to the problem of national language vs. local dialect and to the definition of grammar. This was intended as a sketchy preparation to a larger study "Lingua nazionale e grammatica" which Gr. would never write. Thus "linguistica e scienza del folklore, in Gramsci, sono una parte della teoria della nazione-popolo-Stato e degli intellettuali,^ (Lo P., 209): "La grammatica normativa scritta è [.. .] sempre una 'scelta', un indirizzo culturale, è cioè sempre un atto di politica culturale -nazionalewrites Gr. (1975:2344) answering the question posed by Benedetto Croce 'What is a grammar?* (Croce 1910). If we wanted to summarize Gramsci's reflections we could say that he has given practical application to the general and predominantly abstract statements of Marx and Engels about the social nature of language 一 statements which had probably remained unknown to him.

The solution advocated by Gr. for the sociolinguistic problem (standard language and dialects) is along the line of Carlo Cattaneo, Graziadio I. Ascoli and Francesco D'Ovidio:

chi parla solo dialetto o comprende la lingua nazionale in gradi diversi, partecipa necessariamente di una visione del mondo più o meno ristretta e provinciale, fossilizzata, anacronistica in confronto delle grandi conenti di pensiero che dominano la storia mondiale (Gramsci 1975:1377)

Una grande cultura può tradursi nella lingua di un'altra grande cultura, cioè una grande lingua nazionale, storicamente ricca e complessa, può tradurre qualsiasi altra grande cultura, cioè essere espressione mondiale. Ma un dialetto non può fare la stessa cosa (ibid.).

To arrive at this 6great national language5 it is necessary to establish a consensus among those who must renounce their dialect, as did the Jacobins of the French Revolution. This is the task of the intellectuals. All interventions imposed by the force of the State, as requested by Alessandro Manzoni (Manzoni 1972 [1868]:? 183-209), are doomed to fail since there is no cultural hegemony which can be imposed by a governmental decree if it is not supported by a real, i.e., historic, need (cf. Ascoli's [1873:XVI] reference to the "processo di consenso creativo, onde pur surge e si assoda e si trasforma un vernacolo qualunque,,) It is for the same reason that Gr. wrote an article in 1918 against Esperanto, an artificial language without any historical base brought into being through the establishment of an abstract and rigid grammatical procedure put forward by educated laymen.

It would have been a worth-while undertaking to analyse why Gr. expressed himself so definitely against dialects — a position which completely contrasts with the most wide-spread views of present-day sociolinguistics, including Italy. To understand Gr.'s position we have to refer to the sociolinguistic and cultural situation of Italy before World War IL2 At that time the problem was not how to preserve dialects from their decay under the pressure of the standard language, nor how to prevent linguistic alienation induced by stereotyped and stereotyping mass media. The problem was to enable the large majority of the population, which almost exclusively spoke in dialect, to speak the official Italian language. Only in this way would it be possible, says Gr., to give to the working class and to the peasants the opportunity of a larger, stronger, and richer communication — which would mean the opportunity of having more power from the social and political point of view. Compare the above quotation from Gramsci (1975:1377), with the following citation from one of the most important writers of the years 1940-50, Cesare Pavese, who, coining like Gr. from a dialectal tradition, had personally experienced and suffered the struggle with the standard language, a basically alien linguistic tradition for him:

L'ideale dialettale è lo stesso in tutti i tempi. Il dialetto è sotto storia. Bisogna invece correre il rischio e scrivere in lingua, cioè entrare nella storia (. ..) Nel dialetto non si sceglie, si è immediati, si parla d'istinto. In lingua si crea (Pavese 1952:372 [11.IIL1949]).

To sum up: the book under review has the merit of highlighting an important component of the Marxist thought in Gr. that has up to now been neglected by scholars of Marxism and of Gr. This philologically well-documented book is intended for non-linguists and consequently is written in a non-technical language, with large explanatory excurses, e.g., the explanation of the concept of Substrate, (68ff.).3

At times it could seem that the matter dealt with by the author has little to do with the main topic of the book, i.e., the linguistic thought of Gr. (for example when dealing with the concept of 'linguistic prestige5 in Ascoli, Gil-liéron, Meillet, and Battoli (85ff.)). But such an objection would demonstrate that the reader has simply not understood the core of Gr.'s reflections — that is the basic social nature of language — and hence has overlooked his consequential effort to apply, already as a student in Turin, the critical methods of historical materialism to linguistic research as well. On the contrary, Lo P. has convincingly shown (103ff.) that the typical Gramscian concept of cultural and sociopolitical 'hegemony' owes much to that of linguistic 'prestige'. For the professional linguist this 'tout se tienf of language, society, and history as consistently shown by one of the most original thinkers of the Marxist tradition will certainly be of the greatest interest, particularly at a time when sociolinguistics plays such an important role in the general theory of language.

Revierwer's address:

Paolo Ramat

Istituto di Glottologia

Università di Pavia

1-27100 PAVIA, ITALY

NOTES

1) At some points, however, it would have been useful to show if not the dependence of Gr. on Marx and Engels at least the common historical-materialistic basis, e.g., when Gr. insists on the fundamental unity of all the social manifestations to which I have already alluded: cf. Marx (1953:390,394): "Ein isoliertes Individuum könnte sowenig Eigentum haben am Grund und Boden, wie sprechen [.. .] Die Sprache selbst ist ebenso das Produkt eines Gemeinwesens, wie si% in andrer Hinsicht selbst das Dasein des Gemeinwesens, und das selbstredende Dasein desselben".

2) Also, the critical appraisal of the linguistic policy of the Jacobins has now changed, at a time when local autonomies and the preservation of the cultural identities of ethnic and linguistic minorities are aspired everywhere in Europe. See De Certeau, Julia & Revel 1975 ;Furet&Ozouf 1977.

3) A few repetitions, especially the author's quoting two or three times the same lengthy passage could have been avoided: what is said, e.g., on p.245, regarding the 'quistione della lingua' as being isomorphic with the political problem had already been said on pp. 154-55, and supported by the same quote (cf. also pp.114,128 and 209, etc.).

REFERENCES

Ascoli, Graziadio Isaia. 1873. “Proemio". Z67 l.V-XLI. (Repr. in G. I. Ascoli, Scritti sulla questione della lingua. A cura di Corrado Grassi. Nuova ediz. riveduta e corretta. Torino: Giappichelli 1968.)

Battoli, Matteo, 1925. Introduzione alla neolinguistica. Genève-Firenze: Olschki.

Croce, Benedetto, 1910. t4Questa tavola rotonda è quadrata" [1905], in B. Croce, Problemi di Estetica e contributi alla storia delPEstetica italiana. 172-76. Bari: Laterza.

De Certeau, Michel, Dominique Julia, and Jacques Revel. 1975. Une politique de la langue: La Révolution frangaise et les patois. Paris: Gallimard.

Furet, Francois, and Jacques Ozouf, 1977. Lire et écrire: L"alphabétisation des Frangais de Calvin à Jules Ferry. Paris: Minuit.

Gramsci, Antonio. 1918. t4La lingua unica e ['Esperanto''. Il Grido del popolo, 16 febbr. 1918 (Repr. in A. Gramsci, Scritti giovanili, 1914-1918,174-78. Torino: Einaudi 1972).

-------.1975. Quaderni dal carcere. Ediz. critica dell'istituto Gramsci. A cura di Valentino Gerratana. Torino: Einaudi.

Hall, Robert A., Jr.. 1974. External History of the Romance Languages. New York-London-Amsterdam: Elsevier.

Manzoni, Alessandro. 1972. Scritti linguistici. A cura di F. Monterosso. Milano: Ediz. Paoline. (Pp. 183-209: "Dell' unità della lingua e dei mezzi di diffonderla. Relazione al Ministro della Pubblica Istruzione, proposta da A. M. agli amici colleghi Bonghi e Calcano, ed accettata da loro" [1868]).

Marx, Karl. 1953 [1857/58]. Grundrisse der Kritik der politischen Ökonomie. Berlin: Dietz.

Pavese, Cesare. 1952.77 mestiere di vivere. Torino: Einaudi.

Ramat, Paolo. 1975. "Friedrich Engels zwischen Anthropologie und Sprach-wissenschaft".成 2:335-51.

-----.1978. Review of Theoretische Probleme der Sprachwissenschaft (Berlin: Akademie Verlag, 6). Linguistics, special issue 333-39.
